---
title: "Combining DISTINCT and group_concat() with custom delimiters in SQLite3"
description: "A post where I explain how to use DISTINCT and group_concat() with custom delmiters in SQLite3"
---

In this blog post, I'll introduce two useful tools in SQLite3: `group_concat()` and `DISTINCT`.
I show how they can be used individually, and that you need to watch out when combining them with custom delimiters.

I assume you have a basic understanding of SQL, but mostly you will need to know about the concepts of a table with data and simple `SELECT` queries.

But first, we need a table to work with.
For that, we'll create a table of hobbit names, and fill it with a few hobbits from Tolkien's fictional universe:

```sql
CREATE TABLE hobbits (
  first_name VARCHAR(64),
  last_name VARCHAR(64)
);

INSERT INTO hobbits VALUES
  ("Frodo", "Baggins"),
  ("Bilbo", "Baggins"),
  ("Sam", "Gamgee"),
  ("Pippin", "Took"),
  ("Merry", "Brandybuck")
;
```

To simply select the first and last names of each of the hobbits, the following query can be used:

```sql
SELECT first_name, last_name FROM hobbits;
```

| first_name | last_name  |
|------------|------------|
| Frodo      | Baggins    |
| Bilbo      | Baggins    |
| Sam        | Gamgee     |
| Pippin     | Took       |
| Merry      | Brandybuck |

Great! But we can do more interesting things, as demonstrated next.

## Concatenating
One of the tools in SQL is the [`group_concat()`](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_aggfunc.html#group_concat) function, which returns a string that is the concatenation of all non-null values of the given result set.

For example, this query concatenates all of the hobbits' first names:

```sql
SELECT group_concat(first_name) FROM hobbits;
```

```
Frodo,Bilbo,Sam,Pippin,Merry
```

You can see that, by default, the values are delimited by commas (`,`).
To customise this, it is possible to provide an additional argument that sets the delimiter:

```sql
SELECT
  group_concat(first_name, " and ")
FROM
  hobbits
;
```

```
Frodo and Bilbo and Sam and Pippin and Merry
```

That's a little more readable.

## Distinct values
Another tool in SQL is the `DISTINCT` keyword, which can remove duplicate entries from result sets.

The keen-eyed (or well-read) among you may have observed (or remembered) that Frodo and Bilbo share their last names!
This means that when selecting the last names, we would see a duplicate entry.
And indeed:

```sql
SELECT last_name FROM hobbits;
```

| last_name  |
|------------|
| Baggins    |
| Baggins    |
| Gamgee     |
| Took       |
| Brandybuck |

To remove the duplicate Bagginses from the result set, you can specify that the result set should be made distinct with the `DISTINCT` keyword:

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT last_name FROM hobbits;
```

| last_name  |
|------------|
| Baggins    |
| Gamgee     |
| Took       |
| Brandybuck |

As expected, only a single Baggins remains in the result.

## Concatenating distinct values
So, what if we want to combine `group_concat()` and `DISTINCT`?
We can!
This will concatenate all the distinct last names:

```sql
SELECT
  group_concat(DISTINCT last_name)
FROM
  hobbits
;
```

```
Baggins,Gamgee,Took,Brandybuck
```

Fabulous!
We're wielding these tools like a pro!
Feeling overly confident, we may even try to customise the delimiter for extra points:

```sql
SELECT
    group_concat(DISTINCT last_name, " and ")
FROM
    hobbits
;
```

```
Parse error near line 2: DISTINCT aggregates must
  have exactly one argument
```

Uh oh.
It looks like the way we use the `DISTINCT` keyword confuses the query parser.
It seems like the `last_name, " and "` part is interpreted as two arguments for the `DISTINCT` keyword?

Let's try to fix that with parentheses so that the `DISTINCT` keyword only applies to `last_name`:

```sql
SELECT
    group_concat((DISTINCT last_name), " and ")
FROM
    hobbits
;
```

```
Parse error near line 39: near "DISTINCT": syntax
  error
  SELECT     group_concat((DISTINCT last_name),
    " and ") FROM     hobbits ;
             error here ---^
```

Nope! It seems like this is not allowed.
Consulting the [`SELECT` grammar](https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/select-stmt.html), it is indeed the case that it is required for the `DISTINCT` keyword to directly follow the opening parenthesis of the `group_concat()` (or other) function.

It looks like the `DISTINCT` keyword is only allowed in certain contexts, and a special case has been made for adding it in function invocations.
This special case prohibits extra arguments in the function invocation.

### The Solution
So, how do we solve this?
Well, [an answer on the SQLite Forum](https://sqlite.org/forum/info/221c2926f5e6f155) provided a solution!
It uses a subquery as a workaround:

```sql
SELECT
  group_concat(distinct_last_name, " and ")
FROM (
  SELECT DISTINCT
    last_name AS distinct_last_name
  FROM hobbits
);
```

```
Baggins and Gamgee and Took and Brandybuck
```

The inner query creates an intermediate result set that we can use in the outer query.
This workaround definitely feels like... well, a workaround.
If you find a more elegant solution to this, please let me know!

## Conclusion
Apparently, the `group_concat()` and `DISTINCT` tools do not work together as I expected when using a custom delimiter.

As Bilbo Baggins would put it: I don't know half of SQL as well as I should like; and I like less than half of it half as well as it deserves.
